Please recall earlier emails about leanstral-1.5 which is a lean4-based prover model model from Mistral.
I ran an MLX 4-bit version of it on my M4 mac, in LMStudio.

The goal was to not just prove that there is a bug in bio code but produce machine-checked proof that the fixed code is correct.
The Lean4 kernel certifies each proof, so you trust a small checker, not the model.

Two real comp-bio issues, were both proven autonomously by the model with no hints from me.

A natural question might be: Why bother with this when a LLM can eyeball these?
Because eyeballing only samples; but a proof quantifies.

First issue:
① Interval overlap (the off-by-one every BED user has hit). Half-open intervals [lo,hi).
(a mistake made by everyone hacking bio code at some point)
This classic bug uses <=, so adjacent features [10,20) and [20,30) are reported as overlapping (a variant
at position 20 gets annotated to the wrong gene). The fix is strict <.
Leanstral autonomously proved the fixed test agrees with true point-sharing for every valid interval
pair - self-correcting from compiler errors in 3 rounds.
An abridged (not usable IRL) version of the proof it wrote:

    theorem overlap_correct (a b : Iv) (ha : a.lo < a.hi) (hb : b.lo < b.hi) :
        overlap a b = true ↔ SharePoint a b := by
      constructor
      · intro h
        set x := max a.lo b.lo             -- construct an explicit shared point
        have hxa : x < a.hi := by simpa using max_lt ha …
        exact ⟨x, hax, hxa, hbx, hxb⟩      -- …and exhibit it as the witness
      · rintro ⟨x, hax, hxa, hbx, hxb⟩     -- converse: a shared point ⇒ test true
        simp [overlap, lt_of_le_of_lt hax hxb, lt_of_le_of_lt hbx hxa]

Full write-up: REPORT_A.md

The Lean4 kernel is the authority, not the model. As a control, I handed the false claim (that the
buggy <= test is correct) to an ordinary local chat LLM. It confidently produced a tidy-looking
proof - and Lean rejected it outright, while separately machine-checking the counterexample. A
prover can't be fooled by a fluent wrong argument.

Second issue:
② Reverse-complement round-trip (revcomp(revcomp(s)) = s). The most-run op in genomics, with
two real bugs: IUPAC ambiguity codes dropped (R→N) and soft-mask (lowercase) lost.
Leanstral proved the fixed version is a true involution for every sequence.
Our first attempt failed: my first setup (one thread, low temperature, lots of compiler-feedback rounds);
it froze on one near-miss, and it looked like a model limit. It wasn't: that was my under-powered harness.
Running the prover with a scaled-down version of the paper's approach - several independent samples
(test-time scaling), though at far smaller token budgets than the paper - it solved it cleanly, no
hint, on the 6th sample.

Full write-up: REPORT_B.md.

Conclusion: a local 4-bit model autonomously produced kernel-certified correctness proofs for the fixes
to two meaningful bio-code bugs. (The bugs themselves were ones I specified and Lean machine-checked as
real; the model's job was proving the fixes correct.) These examples are small enough to check by hand
on purpose, but the same techniques scale to large codes that are hard to check by inspection.
